W01 Assignment:  Explain Version Control, James Leight, CSE210

What is version control and why is it important?

Version control is a method to track in detail each intentional incremental change to a software program or project.  Version control uses an information technology system, typically web based to store the data for each change and update and allow the developer to revert back to any of the prior versions if there are any issues or regrets.  Version control can also be utilized to maintain multiple different versions of a software project originating from a common baseline version.  Version control also allows multiple developers to work together collaboratively or in a partitioned manner to efficiently leverage the effort of many on a team.  Version control systems can be centralized or distributed.  For developers with ready access to the internet a centralized system is adequate and provides real time updates from others.  For developers working across time zones or with some or all in environments with spotty or limited internet, a distributed version control system likely provides more benefit.

One benefit of version control is that is a highly structured system that allows a high level of discipline in the software development process.  A misguided or mistaken development path can quickly and efficiently be remedied.  At the same time, the ability to mimimize the cost of a misguided development path encourages developers to experiment and innovate on features that are based on their creative and clever ideas and may "strike lightning" and provide a very beneficial feature for the user.  In a competative and highly saturated marketplace for software products and apps and web based tools, the ability of a developemnt team to innovate and shake out ideas for features and performance with a low cost and risk is extremely valuable to financial sucess.

An an example of version control applied to use in a software development team, a team is developing an app for a movie theater chain.  After developing the basic framework for the app, there are a few ideas on how to handle the pre-purchase of food and drinks.  One version is to prompt the user for a default set of food and drinks as a step in purchasing their tickets; another version is to have a separate section of the home screen that offers the ability to purchase food and drink items at any time.  The team can be divided and each half work on one of those two options.  Both versions can be maintained with incremental steps along the way.  After completed, the marketing team can trial run the two versions with different set of survey users and collect feedback.  Based on this feedback, one option can be selected and the other option archived, OR both options can be merged together as options to the configuration settings, OR a subset of one or both of the options can be selected to carry forward.  The last option is available because each feature is developed as an individual feature and added to the version control baseline individually.

Git is a distributed version control software platform and system.  An example of a git command that selects a single specific edited or updated file that the developer plans to add to the version chain is the following:  > git add updatedfile.txt  This command can be performed on each and every and only those updated files that the developer wants to stick with and "commit" to the version control archive.  A second example of a git command is the command to add those files identified to the archive:  > git commit -m "These are the changes to implement xyz." where the -m option and the following string contains a description of the changes included in the commited set of files to the archive for that version.

Version control is a method and tool for software development that benefits the developer and helps them work efficiently and collaboratively to keep gainfully employed.